You may not think about it much, but you
travel all the time. You travel to the
store, to work, to hang out with
friends. When you're traveling, you're
taking a trip. This is how
transportation planners think about
travel as trips. Sometimes it's a simple
trip from point A to point B, like from
your house to the dentist. Other times,
you're chaining trips together, like a
whole series of errands. Where you go,
what vehicle you use, and what route you
take are all influenced by the land use
pattern and transportation network of
your community. Maybe you like to walk
to get ice cream down the street because
there's a nice sidewalk, but you always
drive to the pharmacy because it's on a
busy road 3 miles from your home. What's
important for urban planners to consider
is how to accommodate all of these
various reasons to travel throughout the
community and city. They want to ensure
that you can make it to your destination
safely and conveniently. They're also
trying to manage traffic and reduce
carbon emissions. These are no small
tasks. In this video, we'll discuss why
transportation is so important,
understand why people travel, and
consider how planners consider various
modes and infrastructure types. Let's
get into it after the bike bell.
The simplest mode of travel is walking.
It's also the oldest transport mode as
humans have evolved to move on two legs.
Walking is cheap, does not require
complicated infrastructure, and can be
very direct. People on foot also take up
very little space, making pedestrian
infrastructure very efficient. However,
walking can't get you very far unless
you got lots of time. With an average
walking speed of about 3 m an hour, most
humans aren't willing to walk more than
a half mile to reach destinations.
That's why in planning documents, you'll
often see 5 and 15inute maps marked with
what's called walk sheds, the distances
from a new development or amenity that
people can walk to in those amounts of
time. In older cities like London, you
can find maps on the streets with this
information, which helps visitors decide
if they want to walk or take another
mode. Speaking of another mode, biking
is often considered the next mode that's
very efficient after walking. That's
because it can take you further than
walking in the same amount of time, but
it still requires the traveler to spend
a little bit of energy. Biking can be
incredibly direct, as bike parking takes
up very little space and can be placed
directly in front of or inside
destinations. Bike lanes can also carry
many people per hour, around 3,000
according to some studies, at peak
times. This makes bike infrastructure an
efficient use of space, especially in
dense areas. One of the downsides of
biking is that it can be dangerous,
especially on roadways without dedicated
infrastructure. It also isn't ideal for
children, the disabled, or the elderly,
especially in areas with hilly
topography or bad weather. Overall,
cyclists and pedestrians are often
referred to as vulnerable road users, as
they're easily injured by vehicles.
Speaking of vehicles, the next mode that
comes to mind is the automobile. Cars
are far faster than walking or cycling
and are often driven up to 80 mph or
more on freeways. They're also
convenient, not having any set schedule.
And they're private. Users of cars can
choose they want to go somewhere and
what route they'll take, allowing them
to stop along the way. They're often
very direct, assuming there's convenient
parking on either end of the journey. In
fact, parking is one of the important
considerations planners must confront
when dealing with new projects. As most
drivers expect a parking space to be
waiting for them at the end of their
journeys, many cities require that
private businesses and homes build off-
streetet parking on their land. This
means that the car infrastructure is a
far less efficient use of space compared
to pedestrians and bikes. The average
parking spot is over 160 square ft.
Also, the price of freedom is high. Car
ownership costs the average American
$12,000 a year. Traffic, of course, is
one of the biggest drawbacks that comes
to mind when discussing cars. While
driving can be convenient and fast, it
often becomes slow and stressful the
more people choose to drive as the
roadways begin to fill up. That's why
it's so important that planners
incorporate alternate modes of travel
into city plans to spread out the
population across other modes like
walking, biking, and transit. Public
transit can come in many shapes and
forms, both in system type and how
separated from other modes they are.
Some types of transit travel along their
own dedicated right of way. Heavy rail
like subways and trains are almost
always separated, and light rail and bus
rapid transit can be. The benefits of
grade separated transportation can't be
overstated. This type of transit has the
largest capacity of any other and can
travel great distances. The Japanese
Shinkansen or Bullet Train carries
930,000 passengers per day at eye
watering speeds of up to 200 m an hour.
If all of these people drove instead,
they would take up far more room on
roadways than they do on trains. Their
travel times would be longer, and it
would cost each of them far more.
California estimates that when its
highspeed rail project is finished, it
will take 400,000 cars off the roads.
This will of course have an enormous
benefit for air quality in the area
which is often some of the worst in the
country. This is because most private
vehicles today use internal combustion
engines expelling carbon dioxide into
the atmosphere as a byproduct. This is
why transit is incredibly sustainable.
The final mode worth mentioning isn't
really a mode at all but a type of trip.
Freight. Though most of us don't think
about it, there's a reason why your
Amazon package gets to your house so
quickly. Whether by delivery van,
18-wheeler, freight train, cargo plane,
or a combination of multiple modes, the
economy relies on millions of freight
trips being made every day. Planners
often consider these unseen trips,
making sure the infrastructure has the
capacity to carry them along with
passenger trips. It's also important for
communities to think about these trips
as large trucks create more air
pollution than other vehicles. In some
areas, like the port of Los Angeles and
Long Beach and California, a huge
portion of the local economy relies on
transportation infrastructure providing
a flawless user experience for freight
operators. A flawless user experience
for humans would probably look something
like this. A really nice neighborhood
surrounding a transit station. This is
called transit oriented development.
Toods, as they're called, are important
because they align land use and
transportation in a way that makes it
really convenient for people to take
transit. This takes cars off the road
and improves air quality. Sometimes
transit stations don't have great
neighborhoods around them and they need
something called infield development.
This is when new housing or commercial
space is built within the boundaries of
a city instead of on the urban edge. It
offers all the same benefits I just
mentioned and is probably a lot better
than the parking lots that often
surround transit stations. Park and ride
may have some logic behind it, but it's
increasingly indefensible when we have a
housing crisis. Land like this is just
waiting to be reused. This can be
particularly important for low-income
households who may not be able to afford
a car. Finally, infill development can
reduce the need to build brand new
infrastructure like roads and utilities
in order to serve a new neighborhood.
According to a study by the Sighteline
Institute in British Columbia, adding
one mile of new highway lane will
increase CO2 emissions by more than
100,000 tons over 50 years. Infill
development doesn't always require brand
new roads or sewer mains or power lines
as it's usually built within the
existing developed area. Thus, it cuts
emissions in this sector as well. Infill
isn't just good for the environment,
it's good for people as well. There
isn't enough housing where people work,
so middle and lower income people are
being pushed further and further from
job centers, forcing them to take longer
and longer commutes. These commutes cost
money, both for the car itself and for
gas, and can adversely affect people's
mental health. Now that we know how
important infill development is, how can
cities and states encourage more of it?
Cities can unlock some of these parking
lots for urban development by
eliminating parking minimums. In 2022,
California passed a ban on parking
minimums within a half mile of transit
stops. This means that businesses don't
need to hold on to those oversized
parking lots to be in conformance with
the local zoning code and can put them
to better use. And because those parking
lots are your transit stops, it's also
transit oriented development.
Cities can also reszone or upzone land
for more mixed use and wait for
developers to take up the opportunity.
That means allowing for higher density
development within a zone or changing a
parcel's zone to one that allows for
more density. Cities across my state are
reszoning strip malls, auto dealerships,
unused industrial areas, and more to
include allowed uses like housing and
retail. In San Jose, a city known for
its swaths of single family zoning, a
program has been started by the city
government to create little walkable
downtowns by reszoning strip malls.
While we'll have to wait and see if
these plans come to fruition, the
visuals provided by the city website
sure are nice. This example demonstrates
a relationship between land use, which
we talked about in a previous video, and
transportation. They're both so
completely linked, it's difficult to
talk about them separately.
Transportation allows us to get to
destinations, and those destinations are
land use. If we organize our cities to
shorten the distance between
destinations, we need fewer cars and
shorter commutes. In the end,
transportation planning is all about
getting to people where they need to go
safely, efficiently, and with a minimum
impact on surround the surrounding
environment. It's not an easy task, but
tools like bikes and mass transit make
it easier for communities to find the
right mode for every trip.